README.md, before:

<div align="center">
	<img src="assets/symbiont-logo.png" style="width: 45%;">
</div>

---
# Symbiont

Symbiont is a lightweight **application host** for Go.

It provides a structured way to initialize dependencies, start long-lived services,
and coordinate application shutdown within a single, testable lifecycle.

---

## Why Symbiont Exists

Applications tend to accumulate complexity in `main.go`.

Startup logic, dependency wiring, background goroutines, and shutdown handling often end up
mixed together, making applications harder to read, reason about, and change.

Symbiont encourages structuring applications as explicit components with clear lifecycles
and dependencies. This improves organization and readability early on, and creates natural
boundaries that make it easier to reorganize the system — including splitting components
into separate deployables — as requirements grow.

## Mental Model

Symbiont hosts an application composed of initialization steps and long-running services,
managed under a single lifecycle.

That lifecycle follows a simple flow:

- **Initialization**: startup logic runs in a controlled sequence
- **Wiring**: dependencies and configuration are provided before any component runs
- **Execution**: long-running services start concurrently
- **Shutdown**: services stop and cleanup runs in a defined order

## Quick Start

Install Symbiont:

```shell
go get github.com/cleitonmarx/symbiont
```

A Symbiont application is composed of:

- **Initializers** — startup logic and dependency setup
- **Runnables** — long-lived services executed at runtime

### Minimal Example

```go
package main

import (
	"context"
	"log"
	"os"

	"github.com/cleitonmarx/symbiont"
	"github.com/cleitonmarx/symbiont/depend"
)

type LoggerInitializer struct{
	LogPrefix `config:"LOG_PREFIX" default:"app"`
}

func (i *LoggerInitializer) Initialize(ctx context.Context) (context.Context, error) {
	logger := log.New(os.Stdout, i.LogPrefix, log.LstdFlags)
	depend.Register[*log.Logger](logger)
	return ctx, nil
}

type Worker struct {
	Logger *log.Logger `resolve:""`
}

func (w *Worker) Run(ctx context.Context) error {
	w.Logger.Println("worker started")
	<-ctx.Done()
	w.Logger.Println("worker stopped")
	return nil
}

func main() {
	app := symbiont.NewApp().
		Initialize(&LoggerInitializer{}).
		Host(&Worker{})

	if err := app.Run(); err != nil {
		// Handle error
	}
}
```

---

## Documentation

Detailed documentation is available in the [`docs`](docs) directory:

- [Initializers and Runnables](docs/initializers-and-runnables.md)
- [Application Lifecycle](docs/lifecycle.md)
- [Dependency and Configuration Wiring](docs/dependency-and-configuration-wiring.md)
- [Running Applications](docs/running-applications.md)
- [Error Handling and Shutdown](docs/error-handling-and-shutdown.md)
- [Packages: depend and config](docs/packages-depend-and-config.md)
- [Introspection and Visualization](docs/introspection-and-visualization.md)

---

## Examples

This repo includes one full-stack example: **TodoApp** (`examples/todoapp`). It demonstrates:

- Initialization and wiring of config, logging, DB, HTTP client, Vault, Pub/Sub, and tracing
- Multiple Runnables in one deployable (HTTP API + background workers)
- Dependency graph introspection (see generated Mermaid in the example README)
- Integration-style testing with Testcontainers

Quick start:

```bash
cd examples/todoapp
docker-compose up -d    # run full stack (DB, Vault, Pub/Sub emulator, Jaeger, LLM runner, app)
# or, with local deps running:
go run cmd/todoapp/main.go
```

What to read:

- `cmd/todoapp/main.go` — app bootstrap
- `internal/app/app.go` — Symbiont wiring (initializers + runnables)
- `internal/adapters/outbound/postgres` — persistence initializers/repositories
- `internal/adapters/inbound/http` — HTTP server runnable
- `internal/adapters/inbound/workers` — background worker runnable
- `internal/usecases` — application services wired as dependencies
- `README.md` inside the example — config, diagrams, and test instructions

---

## License

MIT

Commit message:

Fix resolve report (#4)
* fix: Fix Resolve function to not register not found dependencies

* fix: align indentation in RenderTD function

* docs: update example section in README for clarity and engagement

* fix: correct config indentation  in Mermaid graph

README.md, after:

<div align="center">
	<img src="assets/symbiont-logo.png" style="width: 45%;">
</div>

---
# Symbiont

Symbiont is a lightweight **application host** for Go.

It provides a structured way to initialize dependencies, start long-lived services,
and coordinate application shutdown within a single, testable lifecycle.

---

## Why Symbiont Exists

Applications tend to accumulate complexity in `main.go`.

Startup logic, dependency wiring, background goroutines, and shutdown handling often end up
mixed together, making applications harder to read, reason about, and change.

Symbiont encourages structuring applications as explicit components with clear lifecycles
and dependencies. This improves organization and readability early on, and creates natural
boundaries that make it easier to reorganize the system — including splitting components
into separate deployables — as requirements grow.

## Mental Model

Symbiont hosts an application composed of initialization steps and long-running services,
managed under a single lifecycle.

That lifecycle follows a simple flow:

- **Initialization**: startup logic runs in a controlled sequence
- **Wiring**: dependencies and configuration are provided before any component runs
- **Execution**: long-running services start concurrently
- **Shutdown**: services stop and cleanup runs in a defined order

## Quick Start

Install Symbiont:

```shell
go get github.com/cleitonmarx/symbiont
```

A Symbiont application is composed of:

- **Initializers** — startup logic and dependency setup
- **Runnables** — long-lived services executed at runtime

### Minimal Example

```go
package main

import (
	"context"
	"log"
	"os"

	"github.com/cleitonmarx/symbiont"
	"github.com/cleitonmarx/symbiont/depend"
)

type LoggerInitializer struct{
	LogPrefix `config:"LOG_PREFIX" default:"app"`
}

func (i *LoggerInitializer) Initialize(ctx context.Context) (context.Context, error) {
	logger := log.New(os.Stdout, i.LogPrefix, log.LstdFlags)
	depend.Register[*log.Logger](logger)
	return ctx, nil
}

type Worker struct {
	Logger *log.Logger `resolve:""`
}

func (w *Worker) Run(ctx context.Context) error {
	w.Logger.Println("worker started")
	<-ctx.Done()
	w.Logger.Println("worker stopped")
	return nil
}

func main() {
	app := symbiont.NewApp().
		Initialize(&LoggerInitializer{}).
		Host(&Worker{})

	if err := app.Run(); err != nil {
		// Handle error
	}
}
```

---

## Documentation

Detailed documentation is available in the [`docs`](docs) directory:

- [Initializers and Runnables](docs/initializers-and-runnables.md)
- [Application Lifecycle](docs/lifecycle.md)
- [Dependency and Configuration Wiring](docs/dependency-and-configuration-wiring.md)
- [Running Applications](docs/running-applications.md)
- [Error Handling and Shutdown](docs/error-handling-and-shutdown.md)
- [Packages: depend and config](docs/packages-depend-and-config.md)
- [Introspection and Visualization](docs/introspection-and-visualization.md)

---

## Example

Want to see Symbiont in action?  
Check out the complete example app at [`examples/todoapp`](examples/todoapp)!

You'll find:

- Real-world setup for config, logging, database, HTTP, and background workers
- Clear use of initializers and runnables
- Dependency graph visualization and full-system tests

Curious? Dive into [`examples/todoapp/README.md`](examples/todoapp/README.md) for details, setup, and a code tour.

---

## License

MIT
